Hopefully you see kind of some of
the selling point of rust coming up here.
That's why I think a lot
of people love it is,
this is one of the foundational pieces for
why people love it.
There is something else that is coming,
which is the borrow checker.
This is the reason why Rust gets most of
its actually bad rap from, my personal
belief is that it's the combination of
not knowing what an iterator an enum is.
Mixed in with trying to figure out
the borrow checker at the same time, and
people are just like, what,
I don't even know what's happening.
There's like this pattern matching going
on, I have no idea what's happening.
So that's why I wanted to build that
foundation first, so when I say result, or
I say option, I say enum, you kinda have
a clearer picture in your head, and so
then the borrow checking
part becomes pretty easy.
It'll also make iterators
a bit more sensible.
So first, I'm gonna have to teach
you some rust fundamentals that
there's just really not
a typescript side by side.
And so we just kind of have to do this.
So we're gonna have to talk a little
bit about the stack versus the heap.
So I'm gonna create a kind
of a small little example.
So let's jump back here.
And let's go to our Rust, 1, and
I'm gonna create a function.
And we've probably all
seen this at some point.
I'm just gonna call it foo, and inside
of here, I'm just gonna call it foo.
It's gonna warn me about it, but whatever.
And right here, I'm gonna call foo.
Now, what's gonna happen
when I run this program?
>> Choke.
>> Something's bad's gonna happen as well,
what's gonna happen?
In fact, what's gonna happen is what
is referred to as a stack overflow.
And there's a reason why this
is called a stack overflow.
And I'm gonna give you a somewhat
lying version of what's happening.
This is not perfectly technically
accurate but it's accurate enough.
So whenever you call a function,
something has to be loaded into memory.
So if you think about it, you have a
pointer somewhere in your program walking
through your code, it's going line by line
executing every last instruction, but
at some point we need to
jump into a function.
And so you have two memory regions.
Effectively you have a stack.
I'm drawing it upside down, Intel way.
And then you have a place called the heap.
You can think of the heap as
just like a giant memory place.
You can think of the stack as like
a smaller memory place, but super fast.
And so what happens is,
you have something called a stack pointer.
It's pointed somewhere.
And when we call a function, well,
we probably need to know like,
say what the return address is.
Where do we go back after
we finished your function?
Cuz your function can't be called
anywhere within the program.
So this happens,
this happens in JavaScript,
you just don't experience it because
you that's not how we do stuff.
There's also parameters, right?
Every function has some list of
parameters that you pass into it.
So it now has to have these parameters.
It has to be able to access them.
They may be references, they may be
the literal values, what are they?
And then you're gonna have some
sort of return value at the end.
This is why we have options.
I need to know what am I returning, what
is the shape of the thing I'm returning?
And so that's kind of what happened so
when we called foo over and over again,
we call a foo, we had to have a good
return address, we had to load up any
parameters with a load of any return
value, and then we called foo again.
Well, we better have a return address,
then we better and then we have this and
then it just went on ad infinitum
until we ran out of memory.
We ran out of memory, Stack Overflow,
kaboom, we can no longer operate.
So hopefully that makes general sense of
what's happening when you do function
calls, and so this happens in
every language, it's fantastic.
So now that we kinda covered that,
so you can see how a stack or
a stack overflow happens,
let's talk about a struct for a second.
So I'm gonna go in here, I'm gonna
create struct, let's call it, let's get
away from that, I'll call it MyStruct,
and it has an age of usize, so 8 bytes.
So when I create,
I let foo equals MyStruct,
and I say age is 0, what's going on here?
Well, what's happening deep
down inside of here is,
let's say our stack pointer's right here.
Well, we're gonna need to create a little
bit of memory right here for MyStruct.
MyStruct contains what?
A single age usize, so
you can imagine that there's
a pointer some address in here,
whatever it's gonna be 69 4 20, whatever
the address is inside of here fantastic.
And we're gonna have to put MyStruct
in here which is gonna be 8 bytes,
it's gonna have the 8 bytes for the usize,
and probably nothing else because
there's nothing else we have specified.
It's very easy to do that on the stack,
right,
cuz all you do is you take
your stack pointer and
you add 8, and boom you just got
yourself 8 bytes of memory region.
And now you can just store
your stack right there so
if you need to refer to your stack,
it's right, or my foo, or MyStruct,
it can just jump right there, it's
super fast, very easy to do, all right?
But now,
what happen if I do something like this?
What happen if age is a vector of usize?
Again, I say this a bunch,
vectors can grow, so
they can't just be stored on the stack.
So you'll see something like this, right?
We'll just go like that.
Hopefully this makes sense,
we'll jump over here so
instead of being 8 bytes with just an age,
we need to store something else.
So I'm just gonna just
back up a little bit.
You could imagine that it
could store a pointer,
which points somewhere over into the heap.
This is my place I can grow my memory.
This is the place I can
store all my usizes at.
Then, it's gonna store a length, so
that way I know how many items I have,
then it can store a capacity.
So that way it knows
when it needs to resize.
So if I keep on adding items,
at some point it's gonna run out of
memory that it has allocated over here.
I think normally it starts off with like
5 as the default one when you create
an empty warning, it has some low amount.
And then it has to grow as you add more.
And so as we add more and
more of these little 8 byte units,
eventually we may have to resize.
And so that means, we now have,
there's something going on here,
I'm trying to make it very
clear what's happening.
So that means, we have a MyStruct,
which takes up this amount of room, and
MyStruct has a vector, which is this
part right here, and points off.
So if we had another property, say a usize
itself, we'd have the usize right here,
little 8, little bytes,
it'll just be on the stack.
So if we refer to that one,
it will just be on the stack, but
if we refer to something the vector,
we'd have to go to our property, we'd have
to go to our struct offset into the
pointer, the pointer had to be followed.
We'd have to then offset until
whatever this is, and boom,
we have ourselves that
item out of the vector.
So it's kind of good to have this notion
but there's a there's a reason why I'm
saying all these things which is, notice
what's happening in this thing right here.
For every single thing
that's stored on the heap,
there was something on the stack,
so it's kinda good to
know something from the stack
is pointing to the heap.
And so this is kind of how
the magic of rust happens,
is that as we clean up memory on
the stack, anything that has heap
related memory can also be cleaned
up at the same time for free.
This is why we have so
many rules around the borrow checker.
Because if you just had references
everywhere and things were happening,
you wouldn't know if something was
still pointing to a memory region
that could be cleaned up.
So that is why I've kind of explained it,
that there's all safe programs and then
there's programs that rust can identify
as safe programs, and this is part of it.
So this is one of the key takeaways is to
remember that everything is allocated both
on, or anything that's allocated just
on the stack can be on the stack.
Anything that's allocated on the heap
has something else on the stack.
And so
what is the lifecycle of these items?
How long do they live?
Well, probably the simplest way to think
about it is that if you know any C or
anything like that,
is that when the function returns,
that stack pointer goes all
the way back to the beginning.
So everything after the stack pointer,
even though it may have stuff still in
memory, is just it's not considered valid,
it's out because the next time we
call a function we may overwrite it.
And so therefore, boom, it's gone so
you can't refer to it anymore.
So that if you've ever used C and
you tried to return a pointer to like
something you created within that
function, it usually warns you saying hey,
by the way, you're returning
a pointer onto the stack and
this thing's gonna be gone shortly.
It's probably a bad plan.
All right, we have a question over here.
>> Why can't objects on heap point to
other objects on heap without having
any stack item pointing to it?
>> I mean, technically it still does.
What I mean by that is,
what he's saying is,
can you just have a veck avec have usize?
You certainly can.
You absolutely can.
We're just still playing
the exact same thing.
So let's just do it again.
That means you'd have this vector, what's
in each one of these lines in this vector,
a pointer, a length, a capacity,
and that's pointing to another
place within the heap.
This is pointing to another
It's still, if you trace it all back,
it's still right here.
Something is still on
the stack at some point.
And so someone owns the value.
Someone has it so this is where
the ownership model comes in.
One place owns the value, and other
places have references to those values.
And so in this case,
our little struct that's on the stack
is the owner of those values.
No matter how many layers
deep you have vectors,
there still can always be drawn
back to one place having ownership.
And so this is kind of like just a, it's
a unique concept, you probably haven't
thought a lot about when you're
programming in loosey-goosey languages.
Is there any other questions about this?
Now I'm obviously, I'm not a master,
I haven't written much for compilers and
done that I did it way back in the day.
So even my knowledge is
limited in this area, but
this is just like the general paradigm.
If you can have it in your head,
it'll make things easy.
And you can also understand
why the heap is slow,
cuz where do you allocate memory at?
Well, you gonna ask the operating system,
the operating system's gonna hand you back
like 4K worth of memory or
whatever the page size is.
Then you're gonna have to,
the underlying allocator's gonna
have to divvy out that memory.
Well, how does it know
what to reclaim back?
A lot of math is involved, where
the stacks just like at 8, at 8 remove 16,
right?
It's like super fast.
It's just simple addition and subtraction.
That's why you get all the speed.
This is where a lot of
the speed comes from,
is keeping things on the stack,
super fast.
>> When you move a value to a function,
does the value move inside the stack too?
>> So that's what I don't know,
I don't know that answer but
it's something I've been actually curious
about, I'm sure if you watch John
on YouTube, I mean, I guarantee he
could probably give you an answer.
But what they're saying is say you have
a stack pointer that's pointing here, and
you create MyStruct.
So it takes up some amount of memory,
whatever that is, then you call a function
in which you pass in that struct,
you don't pass a reference to it,
you don't pass a mutable reference to it,
you actually give the function the value.
This is called moving.
And we're gonna we're
about to go over this.
Who, where does that go?
Does that go into the parameter section?
I actually don't know.
Does this, do we mem copy it over to here?
That I don't know exactly what happens.
My assumption is that we do mem copy it,
because when we return from the function,
this could technically still
be valid memory or whatever.
Maybe it stays, I don't know.
I can't tell you the specifics
of how it works under the hood.
>> If a vec is not mutable and
contains a stack variable,
is it still allocated on the heap?
>> So a vector cannot contain the stack
variable, when you put something into
a vector, it's allocated on the heap,
it's not allocated on the stack.
Now this may be a bit confusing cuz
you can technically create a vector of
references to something on the stack.
The thing is is that a reference is just
a system wide number that's all it is, so
64 bit, it's just a 64 bit number that
represents some place in memory so
those are stored on the heap.
They're just followed through back to
wherever, so you could imagine you
could create something like that where
you actually had MyStruck usize.
And you have a let item = MyStruct,
Let items = a vec of MyStruct,
a reference.
So it's only references that I'm storing.
So those references will be stored on
the heap, but the structs won't be.
So I could have back item.
So there you go, I am storing things but
it's the references that live so
now we're getting into what is
called lifetimes, that means,
there's a bunch of rules when you start
getting into this world because at this
world you're trying to have
like maximum efficiency.
You're trying to keep as many
things as you can on the stack,
but still, it can be a little bit, that's
where the trickiest part of Rust comes in.
And during all my application
development that rarely happens,
it's usually like library or more
fundamental stuff that you start getting
into these more trickier situations.
>> If a vector contains
a reference to stack variable,
then which stack variable owns the vector?
>> Well, so you might be thinking
of it a little bit wrong.
So this item right here,
this item owns a vector that
contains a series of references.
It owns the reference which
is 64 bit number in my case.
This thing owns the struct.
So you can see this, I will literally go
over a way in which this airs very soon,
but the simplest way to show it and
I'll just show it right now,
is I can go like this.
We're gonna go like that.
So there we go.
And I'm gonna do this, paste this in here.
So this is a scope.
So that means once we leave this,
every variable created inside
there will be dropped.
And I'm like this, items.push(item).
So notice that we added
a reference right here.
Everything is fine until outside of that,
we try to go, we do the that guy,
whatever that thing's called,
and we try to print it.
And, my goodness, here,
I'm gonna go like this.
What a, just a letdown ending.
I'm gonna derive debug, that just says,
hey, you can be pretty printed.
So look what happens here.
Rust has identified that this thing
does not live as long as that thing,
it makes sense because this thing
lives all the way to here but
what it holds on to only lives right here.
And so let's say whoa, whoa,
whoa, whoa, you can't do that.
But that's why also if I just simply
will say, take out this line,
it's like, hey, it's good.
Because right now,
item's lifetime last till right here.
The things it's holding
onto last till right here.
So it's the same thing.
And we're kind of jumping
ahead a little bit.
So I'm just gonna keep on going.
It's kind of exciting.
So it's time to do the borrow checker.
We've kind of gone over
a lot of this stuff.
You've heard me talk about value
references and mutable references and
this last one.
This is the value, item owns the value,
the vector is the value,
items owns a vector.
Items is getting pushed in a reference.
Okay, so you kind of have to have these
like little things inside of your head
setup, which is the value,
a reference to the value and
a mutable reference to the value,
the right to mutate.
So it's sometimes a little bit confusing,
but let's kind of, let's start seeing it.
I think this will
hopefully help you a lot.